---
layout: post
title: Typology of Ontology Patterns
subtitle: Weekly paper discussion
categories: papers
mathjax: true
tags: [paper, DL, ODP, pattern, CODP, classification]
---

# Summary

The paper [^fn1] introduces a typology of Ontology Design Patterns (ODP) that classifies ODPs according to their level of abstraction. An attempt to translate patterns discussed in other research areas (e.g. data model patterns, analysis patterns, software analysis patterns, cognitive patterns), to a specific domain ontology, namely a production development application ontology, was made.


# Pattern Typology

The paper distinguishes between two dimensions to classify patterns: _abstraction_ and _granularity_:

- **Abstraction** : is about hiding details of some structure in order to describe another aspect of the structure in a more convenient manner
- **Granularity** : is concerned with the scope of the pattern, e.g. treating some small part of an ontology in detail or treating a whole ontology

The proposed typology is based on four _levels of abstraction_:

1. **Application**: patterns of this level address problems concerned with the overall *scope and purpose* of an ontology.
2. **Architecture**: patterns that describe the overall *structure* of the ontology, prescribing certain *construction principles*
3. **Design**: patterns that define a set of ontology elements, structures, or construction principles that solve a *clearly defined modelling problem*
4. **Syntactic**: patterns that describe the realisation of other ontology patterns, or parts or combinations of ontology patterns, in a specific representation syntax

and four _levels of granularity_:

1. **Overall ontology**
2. **Ontology module**
3. **Logical elements**
4. **Element syntax**

Each level of abstraction is associated with a selection of possible levels of granularity. For example, an application pattern defining the purpose of an ontology always concerns the overall ontology and thus only has one possible level of granularity. Design patterns on the other hand may specify logical elements, e.g. axioms, may pertain to specific modules of an ontology, or may restrict the overall structure of an ontology. Hence, design pattern may affect an ontology on three granularity levels, namely 1., 2. & 3.

# Potpourri of subjects

The paper touches on multiple broad subjects without going into much detail into any of them. The abstract the authors claim

1. to discuss the "nature and characteristics" of ODPs
2. to present a typology of ODPs
3. to introduce a catalogue of ODPs, for the domain of product development
4. to document experiences while re-engineering patterns from existing knowledge resources

## With respect to 1.

Pattern characteristics are described superficially only in Section 2.1.1, where structural patterns are contrasted with content patterns. While content patterns deal with modelling solutions specific to a particular domain and introduce named classes/properties, structural patterns are domain independent and only concern the use of features of the underlying logical language. This general distinction between "logical patterns" and "content patterns" has been mentioned frequently in the literature before. Furthermore, the presentation in this paper doesn't even address any of the issues with this dichotomy of "logical" and "content" patterns. For example: if a logical pattern is characterised by not introducing named classes, then any form of reification of auxiliary classes/properties is only possible for content patterns. This is certainly problematic since reification of classes/properties is often necessary to circumvent limitations of the expressivity of description logics (e.g. representing n-ary relations with binary relations). Ultimately, a proper discussion on the "nature and characteristics" is not given.

## With respect to 2.

The paper proposes a typology of patterns with the intention to function as an informal vocabulary in pattern based ontology engineering. The authors motivate their four levels of abstraction for patterns by four leading questions in ontology engineering:

1. What is the purpose of the ontology?
2. What parts are to form the ontology?
3. What concepts, relations, axioms, etc. should the ontology contain? 
4. How should the ontology be represented syntactically?

However, no arguments are presented that show how exactly the presented typology might benefit the communication during ontology engineering. I am rather sceptical with respect to the usefulness of the proposed levels of abstraction.

First, I am not convinced of the usefulness of the notion "application pattern". How may a pattern describe the purpose of an ontology? Since a pattern is a "recurrent solution to design problems", application patterns would represent whole ontologies that are often build. One could argue that patterns themselves are small ontologies that are often built. But this would require a good argument on patterns for patterns. Personally, I would advocate to capture and document the purpose of an ontology via an annotation; not via patterns.

Second, there are proposals of architectural patterns in the literature yet. Hence, this layer of abstraction is vain from a practically point of view.

Third, most patterns discussed in the literature would belong to the design abstraction layer. Therefore, a more fine grained typology for these kind of patterns could potentially facilitate communication during ontology engineering.

## With respect to 3.

I don't see the purpose of the section "Pattern Catalogue" or how it is related to the rest of the paper. The catalogue collects a number of patterns related to an ontology on a production development application. It seems that a detailed discussion about individual patterns of the catalogue could have been the subject of another paper that demonstrates how the catalogue can be effectively used.

## With respect to 3.
I cannot identify the posited value of the described experiences with respect to re-engineering patterns. I would summarise the experiences as "knowledge patterns from other sources are either not sufficiently specified to avoid ambiguity or are documented with respect to another knowledge representation language which makes a translation into description logic tricky."


# Concluding remarks
The proposal of a typology for ODPs that distinguishes between multiple dimensions, e.g. level of abstraction and level of granularity, seems useful in principle. However, a more fine grained typology might be needed and its potential benefits have to be argued for or empirically demonstrated. Otherwise, the paper does not provide sufficient detail on other subjects to be interesting.  

# References

[^fn1]: Blomqvist, Eva. "Ontology patterns: Typology and experiences from design pattern development." The Swedish AI Society Workshop May 20-21; 2010; Uppsala University. No. 048. Linköping University Electronic Press, 2010.
